# Notes (Day 3)

## Java: A Beginner's Guide - Chapter 1

**From**: Page 21

### Try this 1-1

A program that converts gallons to liters is found in the folder [src/java_a_beginners_guide/ch01/GalToLit.java](../src/java_a_beginners_guide/ch01/GalToLit.java).

### Two control statements

#### The `if` statement
The `if` statement is used to execute a block of code if a condition is true. The general form of the `if` statement is:

```java
if (condition) statement;
```
A simple example of an `if` statement is:
```java
if (10 < 11) System.out.println("10 is less than 11");
```

The conditional operators are:
- `==` equal to
- `!=` not equal to
- `<` less than
- `>` greater than
- `<=` less than or equal to
- `>=` greater than or equal to

An example program that demonstrates the `if` statement is found in the folder [src/java_a_beginners_guide/ch01/IfDemo.java](../src/java_a_beginners_guide/ch01/IfDemo.java).

#### The `for` loop
The simplest form of the `for` loop is:
```java
for (initialization; condition; iteration) statement;
```
To remember the order of the `for` loop, think of the acronym `ICU`:
- `I` is the initialization
- `C` is the condition
- `U` is the iteration

The iniiialization portion of the `for` loop sets up the loop control variable. The condition portion tests the loop control variable. The iteration portion modifies the loop control variable.

The condition is a boolean expression that tests the loop control variable. If the condition is true, the statement is executed. If the condition is false, the loop terminates.

An example program that demonstrates the `for` loop is found in the folder [src/java_a_beginners_guide/ch01/ForDemo.java](../src/java_a_beginners_guide/ch01/ForDemo.java).

### Blocks of code
A code block is a grouping statements. A code block is defined by enclosing the statements in curly braces `{}`. A code block can be used anywhere a single statement is allowed.

```java
if (10 < 11) { // start of a code block
    System.out.println("10 is less than 11");
    System.out.println("This is a code block");
} // end of a code block
```

Check the example program [src/java_a_beginners_guide/ch01/BlockDemo.java](../src/java_a_beginners_guide/ch01/BlockDemo.java) for a demonstration of a code block.

### Semicolons and Positioning
In Java, statements end with a semicolon `;`. The semicolon is used to separate statements. The semicolon is not used after a code block.

The best practice for indentation is to use four spaces and do it for each block of code.

**Bookmark**: Page 28 (Try This 1-2)