# Notes (Day 6)

## OCP Oracle Certified Professional Java SE 21 Developer Study Guide - Chapter 1

### Major components of Java
- `javac`- Converts Java source code (.java) into bytecode (.class)
- `java` - Executes Java bytecode
- `jar` - Packages Java bytecode into a JAR file
- `javadoc` - Generates API documentation from Java source code

Bytecode is executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The JVM is responsible for loading, verifying, and executing Java bytecode.

### Understanding the Class Structure
An *object* is a runtime *instance* of a *class*. A class is a blueprint for creating objects. A class can contain *fields* (variables) and *methods* (functions).

A *reference* is variable that points to an object.

#### Fields and Methods
A very simple Java class looks like this
```java
public class Animal {
    String name; // A variable named name of type String
    public String getName() {
        return name; // A method that returns the value of the name variable
    }
    public void setName(String newName) {
        name = newName; // A method that sets the value of the name variable
    }
}
```

- The `public` keyword is an *access modifier*. It specifies the visibility of the class. The class is visible to all other classes.
- The `class` keyword is used to declare a class.
- `Animal` is the name of the class.
- The method name and the parameter types form the *method signature*.
- The `return` keyword is used to return a value from a method.
- `void` means the method does not return a value.

The method signature for the `setName`method is `setName(String)`. The method takes a single parameter of type `String`.

#### Comments
- Single-line comments start with `//`
- Multi-line comments start with `/*` and end with `*/`
- Javadoc comments start with `/**` and end with `*/`. Javadoc comments are used to generate API documentation.

#### Classes and Source Files
Most of the time each class is defined in its own source file. The source file must have the same name as the public class (if there is one) and end with the `.java` extension.

A top-level class is a class that is not a nested class. A source file can contain multiple top-level classes, but only one of them can be public.

#### Writing a main() Method
source: `Apple.java`
```java
public class Apple {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Apples are great!");
    }
}
```

The `static` keyword means that the method belongs to the class, not to an instance of the class. The `main` method is the entry point of a Java application.

Valid formats for the args parameter:
- `String[] args`
- `String args[]`
- `String... args`

The compiler accepts all three formats.

The characters `...` are called *varargs*.

#### Passing parameters to a Java program
source: `Greet.java`
```java
public class Greet {
    public final static void main(String[] args) {
        // This program expects two arguments
        System.out.println(args[0]);
        System.out.println(args[1]);
    }
}
```
### Package Declarations and Imports
Java puts classes into packages. A package is a logical grouping of related classes. You need to tell Java where to find the classes you want to use. You do this with the `import` statement.

source: `NumberPicker.java`
```java
import java.util.Random; // Which package to find the Random class

public class NumberPicker {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Random r = new Random();
        System.out.println(r.nextInt(10)); // Print a random number between 0 and 9
    }
}
```

Package names are hierarhcical and seperated by dots. In `io.korkko.util`, `util` is a child package of `io.korkko`.

To import all classes in a package, use the `*` wildcard. For example, `import java.util.*;` imports all classes in the `java.util` package.

The wildcard does not import classes in subpackages. For example, `import java.*;` does not import classes in the `java.util` package.

Importing lots of packages does not slow down your program. The compiler only includes the classes you use.

One package is automatically imported: `java.lang`. You do not need to import classes in this package.

Java automatically looks for classes in the current package so you do not need to import classes in the same package.

When a class name exist in multiple packages, you can use the fully qualified class name to specify which class you want to use. If you explictly import a class it takes precedence over any wildcard imports.

```java
import java.util.*;
import java.sql.Date; // Takes precedence over java.util.Date
```

What happens here?
```java
import java.util.Date;
import java.sql.Date;
```
In this case, the compiler will give an error because it cannot tell which `Date` class you want to use.

Remember, you can always skip the import statement and use the fully qualified class name.

Code that is not put in a package is put in the default package.

### Creating a Package

Folder structure:
```bash
/tmp/packagea/
    ├── ClassA.java
    └── ClassA.class
/tmp/packageb/
    ├── ClassB.java
    └── ClassB.class
```

source: `ClassA.java`
```java
package packagea;

public class ClassA {}
```

source: `ClassB.java`
```java
package packageb;

import packagea.ClassA;

public class ClassB {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        ClassA a = new ClassA();
        System.out.println("Got ClassA");
    }
}
```

To compile to another directory use the `-d` flag.
```bash
javac -d /tmp packagea/ClassA.java packageb/ClassB.java
```
The package structure is preserved in the output directory.

To specify a classpath use one of the following flags:
- `-cp`
- `-classpath`
- `--class-path`

Example
```bash
java -cp /tmp packageb.ClassB
```

### Ordering Elements in a Class
Order for declaring a class:
1. Package statement (if any)
2. Import statements (if any)
3. Class declaration (required)
4. Field declarations (optional)
5. Method declarations (optional)

Example:
```java
package com.example; // Package must be first non-comment statement

import java.util.Date; // Immediately after the package statement

public class Example { // Immediately after the import statements
    private int count; // Any top-level element within the class
    public void exampleMethod() {} // Any top-level element within the class
}
```

Fields and methods can be in any order. The order of fields and methods does not matter.

Think of the acronym PIC: Package, Import, Class.

**Bookmark**: Page 21 (Creating Objects)
