# Notes (Day 8)

## OCP Oracle Certified Professional Java SE 21 Developer Study Guide - Chapter 1

From: Page 31

### Defining Text Blocks

How do we create multi-line strings in Java? With text blocks!

To create a text block, use three double quotes `"""` to start and end the block. Text blocks can contain multiple lines of text and preserve the formatting of the text.

```java
String html = """
    <html>
        <body>
            <p>Hello, world</p>
        </body>
    </html>""";
```

The first indentation level is called incidental white space. It is removed from the text block. The text block above will be stored as:

```html
<html>
    <body>
        <p>Hello, world</p>
    </body>
</html>
```

However essential white space which is part of the text block is preserved.

This is not a valid text block:

```java
String invalid = """This is not a text block""";
```

Text blocks require a line break after the opening `"""`.

### Declaring Variables

To declare and initialize a variable in Java, you need to specify the type of the variable and the value you want to assign to it.

```java
int age = 30;
```

#### Identifying Identifiers

There are four rules for naming identifiers in Java:
- Identifiers must start with a letter, a currency character (`$`), or an underscore (`_`).
- Identifiers can include numbers but cannot start with a number.
- A single underscore is not allowed as an identifier.
- Identifiers are case-sensitive.
- Identifiers cannot be a Java keyword.

```java
jshell> int _ = 34;
|  Error:
|  unnamed variables are a preview feature and are disabled by default.
|    (use --enable-preview to enable unnamed variables)
|  int _ = 34;
```

The Java keywords are:

```
abstract   assert       boolean    break      byte
case       catch        char       class      const
continue   default      do         double     else
enum       extends      final      finally    float
for        goto         if         implements import
instanceof int          interface  long       native
new        package      private    protected  public
return     short        static     strictfp   super
switch     synchronized this       throw      throws
transient  try          void       volatile   while
```

Some other names that you cannot use as identifiers are `true`, `false`, and `null`.

#### Declaring multiple variables

Many variables can be declared in a single statement. The variables must be of the same type.

```java
int a, b, c;
String name = "John", city = "New York";
int x, y, z = 10; // x and y are not initialized
```

#### Initializing Variables

#### Creating Local Variables
A *local variable* is a variable that is declared inside a constructor, method, or initializer block. Local variables must be initialized before they are used.

##### Final Local Variables
A final local variable is a variable that is declared with the `final` keyword. A final local variable cannot be reassigned after it is initialized.

```java
final int age = 30;
age = 31; // DOES NOT COMPILE
```

Open jshell and try to reassign a final local variable:

```java
class MyAge {
   ...>     public static void main(String []args) {
   ...>         final int age = 34;
   ...>         age = 35;
   ...>         System.out.println("Done!");
   ...>     }
   ...> }
|  Error:
|  cannot assign a value to final variable age
|          age = 35;
|          ^-^
```

Local variables do not have a default value. They must be initialized before they are used.

```java
jshell> class Test {
   ...>     public static void main(String []args) {
   ...>         int x, y;
   ...>         int sum = x +y;
   ...>         System.out.println("Done!");
   ...>     }
   ...> }
|  Error:
|  variable x might not have been initialized
|          int sum = x + y;
|                    ^
|  Error:
|  variable y might not have been initialized
|          int sum = x + y;
|                        ^
```

#### Passing Constructur and Method Arguments

These parameters are like local variables that are initialized with the value of the argument when the method is called.

```java
public class Test {
    public void printSum(int a, int b) {
        int sum = a + b;
        System.out.println("Sum: " + sum);
    }
}
```

Let's try it in jshell:

```java
jshell> Test a = new Test()
a ==> Test@1593948d

jshell> a.printSum(10,20)
Sum: 30
```

### Defining Instance and Class Variables

Variables that are not local variables are either instance variables or class variables.

An instance variable is called a field. It is a variable that is declared inside a class but outside a method. Each object has its own copy of the instance variable.

A class variable is a variable that is declared with the `static` keyword. It is shared among all objects of the class.

As soon as you declare these variables, they are initialized with a default value. The default value for a numeric type is `0`, for a boolean type is `false`, and `null` for an object reference.



### Infering the Type with `var`

The `var`keyword allows you to declare a local variable without specifying its type. The type is inferred from the value on the right side of the assignment operator.

```java
class Test {
    public static void main(String []args) {
        var age = 30;
        var name = "John";
        var city = "New York";
    }
}
```
The formal name for this feature is *local-variable type inference*. It is a feature that was introduced in Java 10.

```java
jshell> public class InvalidVar {
   ...>     var tricky = "Hello"; // var is not allowed here
   ...> }
|  Error:
|  'var' is not allowed here
|      var tricky = "Hello";
|      ^-^
```

Local variable type inference works only for local variables and no other types of variables.

When you type `var`you are instructing the compiler to infer the type of the variable from the value on the right side of the assignment operator. The type of the variable is determined at compile time. It doesn't change type at runtime.

You cannot use `var`for declaring multiple variables in a single statement.

```java
jshell> var x,y = 10; // DOES NOT COMPILE
|  Error:
|  'var' is not allowed in a compound declaration
|  var x,y = 10;
|  ^
```

You cannot use `var`to declare a variable that is initialized with `null`.

```java
jshell> var n = null;
|  Error:
|  cannot infer type for local variable n
|    (variable initializer is 'null')
|  var n = null;
|  ^-----------^
```

`var` is not a keyword. It is a reserved type name in Java. You cannot use `var` as the name of a class, interface, or enum however you can use it as the name of a method or a variable.

```java
jshell> var var = "var"; // This is allowed
var ==> "var"

jshell> class var {} // This is not allowed
|  Error:
|  'var' not allowed here
|    as of release 10, 'var' is a restricted type name and cannot be used for type declarations
|  class var {}
|        ^
```

### Variable Scope
```java
public void eat(int piecesOfCheese) {
    int bitesOfCheese = 1;
}
```

There are two variables with local scope in the method `eat`. The variable `piecesOfCheese` is a parameter to the method. The variable `bitesOfCheese` is a local variable declared inside the method. Neither variable can be accessed outside the method.

Local variables can never have a scope larger than the method they are declared in.

However they can have a smaller scope. For example, a local variable declared inside a block can only be accessed within that block.

```java
public void eatIfHungry(boolean hungry) {
    if (hungry) {
        int bitesOfCheese = 1;
        // goes out of scope here
    }
    System.out.println(bitesOfCheese); // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

The variable `hungry` has a scope that is the entire method. The variable `bitesOfCheese` has a scope that is the block of code inside the `if` statement.

Blocks can contain other blocks. The inner block can access the variables of the outer block but not vice versa.

```java
public void eatIfHungry(boolean hungry) {
    if (hungry) {
        int bitesOfCheese = 1;
        {
            boolean teenyBit = true;
            System.out.println(bitesOfCheese);
        }
        System.out.println(teenyBit); // DOES NOT COMPILE
    }
}
```

### Applying Scope to Classes

The rule for instance variables is easier. An instance variable is in scope for the entire life of the object.

```java
public class Mouse {
    final static int MAX_LENGTH = 5; // class variable, in scope for the entire program
    int length; // instance variable, default value 0, in scope for the lifetime of the object
    public void grow(int inches) {
        if (length < MAX_LENGTH) {
            int newSize = length + inches; // local variable
            length = newSize; // instance variable
        }
    }
}
```

**Summary of variable scope:**
- Local variables: In scope from declaration to end of block
- Method paramters: In scope from declaration to end of method
- Instance variables: In scope from declaration until object garbage collected
- Class variables: In scope from declaration until program ends

### Destroying Objects
All Java objects are stored in your program's memory heap. When an object is no longer reachable, it is eligible for garbage collection. The garbage collector runs automatically when the JVM needs memory.

You should understand when an object is no longer reachable. An object is no longer reachable when one of the following is true:
- The object no longer has any references pointing to it.
- All references to the object have gone out of scope.

You can suggest that the garbage collector run by calling `System.gc()`. However, the garbage collector is not required to run when `System.gc()` is called.

**Bookmark**: Page 51 (Summary)
