# Notes (Day 15) - Core Java, Volume I  - Chapter 3

## Characters

Java Strings uses UTF-16 encoding. UTF-16 uses 16 bits to represent characters. This means that a single character can be represented by a single 16-bit value. This is not the case for all characters. Some characters require more than 16 bits to be represented. These characters are called supplementary characters. Java uses a pair of 16-bit values to represent these characters. This is called a surrogate pair.

The `char` type in Java is a 16-bit unsigned integer.

Always work with strings in Java. Do not use `char` type to represent characters.

## Boolean
The `boolean` type in Java is used to represent boolean values. It can only have two values: `true` and `false`.

## Variables and Constants

Every variable in Java must have a type. You declare a variable by specifying its type and name. You can also assign a value to the variable when you declare it.

Valid variable names must start with a letter, an underscore, or a dollar sign. The rest of the name can contain letters, digits, underscores, and dollar signs.

A letter is a character for which the method `Character.isLetter` returns `true`. A digit is a character for which the method `Character.isDigit` returns `true`.

```java
jshell> Character.isLetter('/')
$5 ==> false

jshell> Character.isLetter('ö')
$3 ==> true

jshell> boolean datanörd = true;
datanörd ==> true
```

The following methods are also available in the `Character` class:
```java
Character.isJavaIdentifierStart() // checks if the character can be the first character of a Java identifier
Character.isJavaIdentifierPart() // checks if the character can be part of a Java identifier
```

Multiple variables can be declared in a single statement. The variables must have the same type.
```java
int x, y, z;
```

You can also declare and initialize multiple variables in a single statement.
```java
int x = 1, y = 2, z = 3; // Must have the same type, notice the comma
```

In Java it's considered good practice to declare variables close to where they are used.

The `var` keyword can be used to declare local variables. The type of the variable is inferred from the value assigned to it. The type of the variable cannot be changed after it has been inferred.

```java
var x = 1; // x is of type int
```

To declare a constant in Java, use the `final` keyword. Constants are variables whose value cannot be changed after they have been initialized.

```java
final int DAYS_IN_A_WEEK = 7;
```

It's a good practice to use screaming snake case for constants.

To set up a class constant, use `static final`.

```java
public class Constants {
    public static final int DAYS_IN_A_WEEK = 7;
}
```

`const` is a reserved keyword in Java, but it is not used.

## Enumerated Types






