# Notes (Day 7)

## OCP Oracle Certified Professional Java SE 21 Developer Study Guide - Chapter 1

**From**: Page 27

### Literals

A *literal* is a fixed value that appears directly in the code. For example, `12` is a literal. Literals can be assigned to variables.

By default Java treats integer literals as `int` and floating-point literals as `double`. To specify a `long` literal, append an `L` or `l` to the number. To specify a `float` literal, append an `F` or `f` to the number.

User upprcase `L`for long literals because lowercase `l` looks like the number `1`.

To specify a different base, you can use the following prefixes:
- `0b` or `0B` for binary
- `0` for octal
- `0x` or `0X` for hexadecimal

You can use the underscore `_` to separate digits in a literal. For example, `1_000_000` is the same as `1000000`. You can even use multiple underscores in a row, but it's not recommended.

However you cannot use an underscore at the beginning or end of a number, or next to a decimal point. For example the following are invalid: `_1000`, `1000_`, `10_.0`, `10._0`.

### Reference Types
A reference type refers to an object. A reference type can be assigned `null` to indicate that it does not refer to an object.

```java
String name = null;
```

Unlike primitive types that store the actual value, reference types store the memory address of the object. A concept referred to as *pointer*.

The actual memory address is not accessible in Java. This is a good thing because it prevents you from manipulating memory directly.

A value is assigned to a reference type in two ways:
- By assigning a reference to an existing object of compatible type
- By creating a new object using the `new` keyword

```java
String greeting;
greeting = new String("Hello");
```

All references are the same size, regardless of the type of object they refer to. This is because they store the memory address of the object, not the object itself.

An objects sits on the heap, and does not have a name. The reference variable is what has a name.

It's the object that gets garbage collected, not the reference.

### Primitive Types vs Reference Types
All primitive types have lowercase names. All classes that comes with Java start with an uppercase letter.

Reference types can be used to call methods on the object they refer to, assuming the reference is not `null`. Primitive types cannot call methods or have the value `null`.

### Wrapper Classes
Java provides a set of classes that correspond to the primitive types. These are called *wrapper classes*. The wrapper classes are used to represent primitive types as objects.

| Primitive Type | Wrapper Class | Inherits number? | Example |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| boolean | Boolean | No | `Boolean myBoolean = true;` |
| byte | Byte | Yes | `Byte myByte = 123;` |
| short | Short | Yes | `Short myShort = 123;` |
| int | Integer | Yes | `Integer myInt = 123;` |
| long | Long | Yes | `Long myLong = 123L;` |
| float | Float | Yes | `Float myFloat = 123.45f;` |
| double | Double | Yes | `Double myDouble = 123.45;` |
| char | Character | No | `Character myChar = 'a';` |


The valueOf method is a static method that returns an object of the wrapper class. The valueOf method is overloaded to accept all the primitive types that correspond to the wrapper class.

```java
Integer myInt = Integer.valueOf(123);
Boolean myBoolean = Boolean.valueOf(true);
Double myDouble = Double.valueOf(123.45);
Long myLong = Long.valueOf(123L);
```

Converting from String using the valueOf method:

```java
Integer myInt = Integer.valueOf("123");
Boolean myBoolean = Boolean.valueOf("true");
Double myDouble = Double.valueOf("123.45");
Long myLong = Long.valueOf("123"); // Note that the L is not needed and not allowed
```

To convert a string to a primitive type, you can use the parse method. The parse method is overloaded to accept all the primitive types that correspond to the wrapper class.

```java
int myInt = Integer.parseInt("123");
boolean myBoolean = Boolean.parseBoolean("true");
double myDouble = Double.parseDouble("123.45");
long myLong = Long.parseLong("123");
```

All these numeric wrapper classes inherit from the `Number` class. The `Number` class is an abstract class that is extended by the numeric wrapper classes.

**Bookmark**: Page 31 (Defining Text Blocks)



